---
layout: post
title: Seen and Unseen
---

For the native population of the far-away South Pacific islands, the years of the Second World War were a tumultuous time. Successive waves of Japanese and American troops arrived on their secluded islands, established military bases, and brought in all kinds of modern goods - chocolate, cans, radios. These goods, or 'cargo,' changed the way of life of the islanders who came to possess them. They had found an escape door straight to modernity. But just as quickly as the Americans or Japanese had arrived, they left. Literally overnight, the long runways and military base buildings they had constructed stood empty, and the goods had disappeared. The islanders were mystified. Where were they to get the goods from again? How were they to bring prosperity back into their lives?

Anthropologists visiting decades later would see full-size replicas of military airports with long runways cut out in the forest, thatched control towers, and large satellite dishes made out of sticks and bamboo, and even large military pilot headphones with coconut shells substituting for where the speakers would be. These were the results of cargo cults, an attempt by these islanders to bring back the cargo that had come into their lives on a sudden day. So what they did was recreate the scene as accurately as possible. After all, the foreigners had arrived, built a long stretch of road and some buildings, and staffed it with men, and then soon mystical flying objects had started landing on these long stretches of road, bringing in those precious cargo. So they reasoned simply that if they were to build what they saw, the rest would follow.

So what does this have to do with neurodegenerative research? Sometimes, I feel like we are these islanders. We see the end result - the symptoms of diseases like Parkinson's, and we have some understanding of some of the players - dorsal striatum, dopaminergic neurons, alpha-synuclein. What we seek to understand is the journey from a normal, functioning brain to the one that exhibits Parkinson's symptoms. So we build models that hope to bridge this gap, animal models and cellular models. But I feel that the assumption that these models will uncover unknown biology is akin to the idea that building a fake control tower and satellite out of bamboo will lead to planes landing.

We do what we can. We build our models based on what we know. Our models have aggregating synuclein or they have dopaminergic neurons dying. Superficially, they represent what we understand about the disease. But what we don't understand is whether these will lead us to our final goal. I don't want to take the comparison to cargo cults of the Pacific too far. Obviously, our understanding of the brain or the use of a mouse brain has more knowledge behind it than the fake things the islanders built. But what we fundamentally don't know is how much. But we keep building newer and newer models based on an incomplete understanding of the biology. We create stem cell-derived neurons from patients. These are 'human' neurons that promise to illuminate the biology of the disease in a manner that 'incomplete' animal models will not. But why? Because they came from humans? Because they express the three or four proteins that we know are expressed in dopaminergic neurons. Just like the Pacific islanders who thought building thatched control towers and runways would bring planes with goodies out of the sky, do we think our TH/NeuN+/MAPT+ dopaminergic neurons are going to unlock the secrets of the disease?

Our world is a mystery, and humans have always built models to understand how the world works. Some models are obviously better than others. Physics and Chemistry have had great success in modeling how things should work because they have some standard rules. Physics has an understanding of universal fundamental rules - gravity, light, heat, energy - and these rules apply everywhere. So we may not understand how to have gone to Mars, but we know the rules, and we know that they apply on Mars just as they apply here. So we can build a rover that can land on Mars and move around.

In this spectrum of model building, from physics with its near-complete understanding of the fundamentals to Pacific islanders and their farcical understanding of the fundamentals, where do biological models of Parkinson's disease fall?
